We seem to have jumped from mozzarella lunches to baked potato suppers overnight. It was only two weeks ago we ate our last lunch outdoors (rather wobbly salmon rissoles with green bean and shallot salad). Admittedly I had a fleece on, but I distinctly remember having to take it off at one point, so strong was the sun. Two weeks later and I'm wearing thermals. I give any baked potato a good hour. It gets a hot blast at 200C and rarely is the skin less than crisp. The only ones that don't seem to work are those that are fiddled with. By which I mean those occasions when I've been tempted by suggestions to bake them in foil, pierce all over with a fork or cook on a fancy trivet. The ones that leave the oven with a fine, crackling crust and a cloudlike, fluffy interior are generally those that have had the least done to them. A scrub, a piercing or two with the tines of a fork and a good salting all over is all the attention they get. In our house a baked potato is valued for its lack of attendant fuss. The idea that there is at least one supper you can bung in the oven without a further thought rather appeals to me. I like them as they are, split and buttered. Yet there is much to be said for a baked potato whose flesh has been hollowed out, whipped up into a fluff with other ingredients and returned to the empty shell. A quick blast in the oven or under the grill to gild the fork-furrowed crust, and you have a sublime supper. Potential fillings for baked potato are many, and believe me when I say I have probably tried them all, but there are one or two that I am particularly fond of at the moment. My current favourite involves pork rillettes folded into the whipped potato. The mixture of fluffy spud and deeply savoury shredded roast pork is a sensation. They are, I suppose, a more interesting version of the corned beef-stuffed ones I ate as a kid. You need no butter, as the roasted fat in the rillettes melts in the heat. A crisp salad of chicory or frisée and some knife-sharp gherkins on the side is a very successful accompaniment. Other times I have folded in smoked mackerel, which seems in one swoop to turn a lone potato into a full supper. Even more so if you fancy opening a packet of frozen peas to keep it company. Other interesting fillings involve smoked haddock simmered first in milk; Gorgonzola with a final dusting of grated Parmesan for the crust, or chopped and fried rust-red chorizo. I should also put in a shout here for the juices of stews and their like that are sitting in the fridge, those last little bits that aren't enough for a meal but too delicious to throw out. These can be poured into the potato as it is mashing in the food mixer, then piled back in to the shell and briefly baked. I have until recently avoided the suggestion of adding beaten egg whites to the potato filling, simply because it sounded like one step too much trouble for what was always supposed to be the simplest supper in the book. However, two beaten egg whites will lighten the fillings of four large potatoes to almost soufflé-like proportions. A treatment that somehow seems so right when you are using cheese in the filling. Whenever the oven is on I look round for other things to cook at the same time. I often put in a tray of apples to roast for the coming week's breakfasts. It is a quick thing, involving little more than chopping up a few of the season's fruits, yet it is an economical use of power and time. If I don't eat them for breakfast then they often turn up after supper, crowned with crème fraîche or a compote of dried fruits. It's a given with me that once I put the garden furniture away for the year, it's not long before the oven goes on. BAKED POTATOES, RILLETTES AND ROSEMARY Most delis and decent supermarkets can be relied on for a tub of pork rillettes. The coarser the better. Makes 4. 4 medium-sized baking potatoes, about 350g each 2 large sprigs of rosemary 250g pork rillettes, home made or deli bought 2 tbsp finely grated Parmesan Scrub the potatoes and prick them a few times with a fork. Pat them almost dry then dust lightly with salt and leave them to dry for a few minutes. Bake them at 200C/gas mark 6 until the skin is crisp and the inside soft and fluffy – a matter of 45 minutes to an hour, depending on the variety and size of the potato (I find an hour is about right for a large potato). Remove the rosemary leaves from the stems and finely chop them. You need about a teaspoonful. Slice the top off the potato. Using a tablespoon, scrape out the flesh from the potato and its lid into the bowl of a food mixer. Mix briefly with the flat beater, so that the potato no longer has any lumps, but take care not to overmix. Carefully introduce the rillettes and the rosemary. Be mindful that the texture of the pork should still be visible, so avoid mixing for too long. You can, of course, do this by hand if you prefer. Pile back into the skins and place snugly on a baking sheet. Put the lids upside down on the baking sheet, too. Scatter the grated Parmesan over the top of each potato and return to the oven. Bake for a further 10 minutes, till the top of the filling is starting to crisp lightly, then replace the lids and serve. ROAST APPLES WITH CINNAMON FRUIT COMPOTE On cold days I sometimes lift the lid off the cinnamon jar and breathe in its sweet, smoky notes before scattering a pinch over toasted and buttered muffins. The whole quills and ground spice can be used to scent simple winter compotes of prunes or dried apricots. My breakfasts last weekend consisted of these baked apples served cold with a spoonful of cinnamon-flecked dried fruits to cheer us all up. Serves 2 as a dessert or breakfast. 650g dessert or cooking apples a pinch of cinnamon the juice of ½ a lemon 4 cloves For the compote: 100g dried figs 100g soft-dried dates 2 tbsp dried cranberries or dried cherries a stick of cinnamon 2 tbsp honey a little water Set the oven at 200C/gas mark 6. Peel, quarter and core the apples and roughly chop them. Put them in a baking dish, then toss with the cinnamon and lemon and tuck in the cloves. Bake the apples till the edges are lightly golden and soft enough to crush with a fork. Depending on your choice of apple, it will take anything from 15 to 30 minutes. (This will keep in the fridge for a day or two.) While the apples are cooking, snip the stalks from the figs, cut the fruit in halves or quarters, and toss in a small saucepan with the dates and cranberries or cherries, the cinnamon, honey and a couple of tablespoons of water. Bring to the boil then turn the heat down to a gentle simmer, then leave to bubble gently for about 15 minutes, till the fruit has plumped and softened. To serve, spoon the apples into dishes then top with the dried fruits.★ nigel.slater@observer.co.uk Tender by Nigel Slater is published by Fourth Estate at £30. To order a copy for £27 with free UK p&p go to guardian.co.uk/bookshop or call 0330 333 6847