I have never trod the common path. As a young child I invented my own language, and at the age of four made my parents buy me a Kate Bush album. My mother was a strong-willed gardener who spent much of her time trying to tame herself so she wouldn't frighten the neighbours. My father had battled Mosley's blackshirts in east London, fought with the RAF and designed furniture for Heal's. And we all lived in Gower, South Wales with its ancient wells and burial chambers. I remember going deaf when I was five as a result of adenoid problems. I told no one and happily sat in my own world until a teacher finally noticed I couldn't hear a word she said. When my parents' marriage collapsed and a bitter divorce followed, I felt even more removed from what was normal. My mother was devastated and I hid my own misery so I could comfort her. I was always interested in spirituality and when I grew up and moved to London I learned to meditate. Then in 1996 my father died, and in the same year two close friends also passed away. I started using cannabis as a way to escape the years of pain my grief threatened to unleash. When the new millennium arrived I had a nervous breakdown. I stood in the shower, defeated by taps; I couldn't remember how they worked. I found language had broken. I was scared by the prospect of never getting better, but after being admitted to hospital I took the seeds of my meditation lessons and began practising t'ai chi every morning. I moved to Brighton, learned reflexology and Reiki, and found my church in a weekly "five rhythms" class. Every Tuesday night, 50 people would gather and dance not just as a form of exercise, but to exorcise whatever held them back. We would empty our minds and let ourselves go. Our teacher was an inspirational woman who worked with a shamanic group called the Sacred Trust. Within a few months, I signed up for a two-year course in shamanic practice. Part of this involved being buried alive. I got the email telling me what to bring for my first meeting. I began to fret over the logistics of how to get a spade, groundsheet and a bundle of planks on Southern Trains rather than dwelling on what I had agreed to do. A group of 18 of us spent four days increasing our trust in each other. And each afternoon we would walk with spades up to a clearing and dig the 3ft, coffin-sized holes that would be our individual graves. In the early spring sun, it all felt like a joke. But on the evening of our burial my whole being shook with fear. We were told that this moment was a choice between fear and love; a letting go of the ego petrified of its own death and an embrace of eternal, life-loving spirit. We walked up to the burial ground in silence and each brought an offering of wood to Grandfather Fire, to ask that we see the sun rise the following morning. One by one we lay down in our pits while two others covered us with planks and then earth until all that was left was an air hole the size of an orange. As soon as I was covered over I felt the fear rise up in me like a devastating wave. To calm myself I began to talk to the soil, to tell Mother Earth the story of who I was and what had brought me here; as though I was talking to a friend I hadn't seen since birth. The fear subsided and I felt I was in the safest place I could imagine. I sang, screamed and wept. I asked Mother Earth to take back all the hurt that I didn't need any more. I lay in my own grave and came to peace with the truth that waits for us all: that we will die and all our clever stories, habits and prizes will come to rest in the ground to be transformed into something new and unrecognisable. When day broke I was dug out and cried in gratitude for nothing more than living to see another morning. I walked in the ordinary miracle of day and I felt rinsed through; clean as water. Everywhere I looked life was phenomenal, an exceptional gift that I was fortunate enough to bear witness to. I had walked into the jaws of death and was still alive. I am now a qualified shamanic practitioner. My burial is something I don't often talk about, but it's there in everything I do. For all the misery and suffering that's reported and circulated, I recommend a diet of anything that makes you feel grateful to be alive. We're only here a few summers after all and we have a duty to honour this world as the marvel it is. The most lasting effect of being buried alive is I try to do one thing each day that scares the daylights out of me. The other day it was painting my sitting room magnolia.  Do you have a story to tell about your life? Email it to my.story@theguardian.com. If possible, include a phone number.