I doubt Sheffield Wednesday fans are crying many tears for Michael Grade's decision to mothball most of the production schedule of the Leeds-based ITV Yorkshire. After Wednesday's triumph in the 1991 Rumbelows Cup final the decision of the region's broadcaster not to delay transmission of War of the Monster Trucks and show it instead of Nigel Pearson parading the cup around Wembley rightly still rankles with their supporters and shows that the network's history of bungling with football is not confined to this season's FA Cup. Knocking ITV is not a new phenomenon and back in the 1970s it was quite common for schoolchildren to be banned by their parents from watching programmes on the vulgar station – they tolerated the BBC's Blue Peter because it was educational but feared that just a glimpse of Magpie might turn their kids into short-trousered versions of Malcolm McDowell at the end of Lindsay Anderson's film If... The tone of the two children's shows was mirrored on Saturday mornings when the Corporation's earnest Swap Shop was pitted against the more boisterous Tiswas and continued after the midday news with the schoolmasterly Bob Wilson on Football Focus contrasting sharply with the knockabout if usually affectionate irreverence of Saint and Greavsie on the other side. Admitting you were fond of the hoary double act is worse than a confession about a guilty pleasure, it's almost like breaking a taboo. And, yes, there was plenty to make you cringe, from Jimmy Greaves' habitual reference to Scotland as "chilly Jocko land", his rather patronising fondness for Hamilton Academical, "the dear old Accies", the obsession with juxtaposing frequent stories about Millwall's innovative creche with antiquated shots of burly dockers walking down Cold Blow Lane, never mind Ian St John's catchphrase: "You kill me, Greavsie". But there was enough to admire as well. It is easy to forget that at the beginning of the 1985-86 season, when the programme rose from the ashes of On The Ball on the cancellation of World Of Sport, people genuinely feared about the game's survival. In the 10 years from Leeds fans rioting at the 1975 European Cup final to Heysel, football had sleepwalked to pariah status as far as the media was concerned and that season began with a stand-off between broadcasters and the Football League that led to a blackout for the first 12 weeks of the campaign. It was hardly an auspicious start for the show but they improvised, shot lots of funny segments and compensated for the lack of clips by talking about the game with authority. Two wonderful footballers, loquacious and mischievous, doubling up as presenters and pundits, managed to hold the fort until a compromise came and highlights returned to the screen. For five years they attracted audiences of almost six million viewers as they pricked football managers' pomposity and brought some humour back to a po-faced game. As is the custom with television executives, this was not enough and they sought to milk the franchise further with various spin-offs for Greaves, including the unlamented quiz show Sporting Triangles which served more purpose as a promotional tool for Lyle & Scott lemon jumpers than it did as a credible alternative to A Question of Sport. Of course, they also lent themselves to merciless parody, first by Spitting Image and then by Baddiel and Skinner but by the time the Fantasy Football duo invited St John and Greaves on to their Euro 2004 show this had turned into graceless and rude abuse, using them as props for savage put-downs for the benefit of a pissed-up and baying audience. That farrago captured how far football programmes had come in 20 years, from warm-hearted banter and a wallow in nostalgia to scathing and belittling castigation. As establishment figures they were fair game but it was painful to watch and was not even redeemed by being funny. Saint and Greavsie played only a very minor part in changing football in the late 1980s and had no hand in the burgeoning fanzine culture that reclaimed the game. They did not understand it and were often targets of the writers' exasperation with the way football was televised. If they were seen to trivialise the game with their approach, perhaps the game back then was in need of trivialisation, to give fans a proper perspective. What they deserve credit for, though, was forcing the BBC to raise its game, introducing Terry Venables as a trenchant pundit to counterbalance Jimmy Hill and ushering in Alan Hansen's first few incisive years on the sofa. Twenty-five years on, Sky's Soccer Saturday is its only heir and what we cherish in that format, ex-professionals talking candidly and wittily, was pioneered by St John and Greaves. Football has never really been "a funny old game" but when it most needed some light relief, Saint and Greavsie provided it.