Reality television star Jade Goody was like Marmite – you either loved her or hated her, sometimes both at the same time. Everyone had an opinion about her. When she died it seemed that everyone was talking about her. From the elderly to the young, she was the topic of conversation at dinners, school runs and bingo halls. Jade burst into our lives on Big Brother 3. She made a huge impact but for all the wrong reasons. "Where is East Angular? Is it abroad?" "What's a sparagus?" "Who is Heinzstein?" "Is Rio de Janeiro a person?" It was these quotes that turned her into a figure of total ridicule within the media. She was reviled, mocked and loathed in every radio show, TV programme and magazine. Oblivious to all this, Jade continued to be herself inside the BB house. Smiling her way through unrequited love (for PJ), bullying and a verruca ("minging!"), she somehow managed the biggest turnaround of public feeling in the history of Big Brother. The nation fell in love with her naive charm and, amazingly, she finished fourth. Jade went on to become the most successful Big Brother housemate ever. Jade's lack of education stemmed from caring for her mother, Jackiey, from the age of five, after Jackiey lost the use of her arm and was blinded in one eye in an accident. She spent a lot of time at home alone with her mother and not much time at school. Her drug-addict father was in and out of prison and left when Jade was two. Jade's reason for going into Big Brother was to get away from caring for her mother. She loved Jackiey but felt robbed of a childhood and felt that the house was her chance for some fun. She got a lot more than she bargained for: one of the hottest agents in show business, a perfume, an autobiography, workout DVDs, a beauty salon, a celebrity husband (Jeff Brazier – father to her two sons, Bobby and Freddie) and a hugely lucrative TV career. It was also her lack of education that signalled her spectacular fall from grace. In January 2007, Jade went into Celebrity Big Brother. One of Jade's housemates was Shilpa Shetty – a Bollywood star, elegant, educated and chic. Goody appeared threatened by Shilpa's demure demeanour and, with two fellow housemates, set about cruelly picking on her and making her time in the house a misery. The series attracted 45,000 complaints to Ofcom, with allegations of racism and bullying. Jade's perfume was taken off the shelves, her career in tatters. But she continued to live her life in the media, so there were cries of attention-seeking when Jade was photographed leaving hospital in a wheelchair. A girl who had constantly sought to sell her "story" had seemingly taken this a step too far. Was this to try to win the nation's sympathy? No. It was because Jade had cervical cancer. And she was terminally ill. During the last few weeks of her life, Jade demonstrated enormous bravery and she showed us what a great mother she was. She saved countless lives as the number of young women getting screened for cervical cancer rose dramatically. She married her boyfriend, Jack Tweed, and was constantly in all the gossip magazines as she tried to raise money for her boys' schooling after she'd gone. Her funeral was exactly what Jade would have wanted: a huge media affair, with crowds lining the streets, all there because they loved her. They loved her because she was one of them; because she wasn't perfect, she made mistakes – huge mistakes – and somehow they forgave her. She was infuriating and lovable. She was uneducated but savvy. She was vulnerable yet in the face of death resolutely strong. I was there at the beginning of her career, and there for the most challenging moment of her career. I felt joined to her. I went to her funeral with my producer, Phil. We walked through the huge crowds and into the church packed to the rafters with friends and family, televisions up everywhere and paparazzi and film crews outside. I turned to Phil and said, "Jade would have loved this."★