Whether he was winning the Golden Boot at the 1986 World Cup or scoring England's equaliser against West Germany in the 1990 semi-finals, Gary Lineker will always be linked with the greatest moments of Bobby Robson's eight years in international management. The former striker described their association as "probably the key relationship I had as a player" as he recalled some of the incidents that were to define both of their careers. "The main memory we always shared was 1990," Lineker said yesterday. "How close we were to winning the World Cup. I've spoken to Bobby about this and he felt the same as I do. It's the one thing, looking back, that I've got a tinge of disappointment about. We were on the brink of getting to the final and I think if we had got there, we would have been strong favourites. I had this conversation with him once or twice. I remember the frustration, getting that close." That semi-final, lost to the eventual champions, West Germany, on penalties, remains the biggest England game of the past 40 years. "I think 1990 was hugely important to football in this country," Lineker said. "After that everyone became interested in football. It wasn't just working-class men it was all classes, women, kids – it returned to the family game it should be. Bobby was at the helm then and that helped to cement his popularity. "Out of everything in my career, the moment people ask me about most often was when Gazza got booked in that semi-final. I could see his bottom lip was going. I think it says a lot about Bobby that it was him I turned to, to ask him to have a word. I didn't know that the moment would be caught on camera, but everyone watching on TV saw it. "Bobby knew instinctively when to scold him and when to put an arm round his shoulder. Gazza was an emotional guy and I know he exasperated Bobby on occasions – I remember he was out playing tennis on, I think, the day of the semi-final, and Bobby had to go out and drag him off the court – but Bobby was brilliant at connecting with people. "I've never met anyone more enthusiastic about the game, and I think that was one of his great strengths. That's why he kept going for such a long time, and one of the reasons why he was genuinely popular. He was certainly popular with the players. He got the maximum from everyone who played for him, which his record proves. He did amazingly well with Ipswich and England, was a success in Europe and he did a decent job with Newcastle, as they probably realise now. "He expected a lot: if you were slacking, Bobby wouldn't hesitate to give you a tongue-lashing. But if you earned his trust he was fiercely loyal. I was one of the ones who benefited – he could easily have left me out in 1986 after I hadn't scored in the first two games. He did make a couple of changes before we played Poland but he stuck by me and it changed my life, really – I got a hat-trick in that game, and from then on I started scoring goals." In 1992, two years after Graham Taylor took over from Robson as England manager, Lineker retired from international football. "I still saw him on occasions," he says of Robson. "We had dinner once or twice and I did a documentary with him a few years ago. The last time I saw him was a few months ago at a Newcastle game. He was frail then, but he sort of brushed it off, as he did. He'd just keep fighting it. He wasn't a man just to sit around and do nothing. After football, he started the Bobby Robson Foundation and the charity then became his driving force. "What we're seeing from the reaction to the news is that Bobby managed to create a special bond with the public. He had such success as a manager, and as a player before that, but he was just such a likeable guy, a family man. It was his enthusiasm and his passion that came through. It's the combination of all those things that made him so hugely popular. "When I look back at my time with England, it's a special thing, playing for your country. To play for a manager like that – who was so loyal, and gave you so many opportunities – makes you feel hugely grateful and lucky. Privileged, really, to have played for one of the greats."